
ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES
Rules & Regulations
(For Students enrolled from July 2019 onwards)
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

1. INTRODUCTION

Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as energy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific knowledge, IIT Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on campus.

The undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning, creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objective mind.

The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit System and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired by Dean (Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics PG)/Associate Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).

The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a high standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These academic programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate modifications/ improvements as and when necessary.

2. ACADEMIC SESSION

The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer term as per the following timelines.

2.1 Academic Calendar

The Academic Calendar for each academic session will be notified by the office of the Dean (Academics) before the start of the session. The Academic Calendar will specify the dates for registration, last date for adding/deleting courses, last date for withdrawal from courses, date of mid-semester examination, last date for submission of mid-semester grades, date of end-semester examination, last date for submission of end-semester grades, date of summer term, and such other dates as may be necessary.

3. CREDIT SYSTEM

The Institute follows a credit system for all its academic programmes. Each course has a certain number of credits assigned to it depending on the lecture, tutorial and laboratory contact hours per week. In general, one lecture hour per week per semester carries one credit, one tutorial hour per week per semester carries one credit, and two to three laboratory hours per week per semester carry one credit.

4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION

4.1 Teaching

4.1.1 Course Structure

Each course is identified by a unique code and a course title. The course code consists of a two-letter department code followed by a three-digit number. The first digit indicates the level of the course. Courses numbered 100-199 are normally at the first year level, 200-299 at the second year level, 300-399 at the third year level, 400-499 at the fourth year level, 500-599 at the fifth year level, 600-699 at the sixth year level, and 700-799 are special courses.

4.1.2 Course Credits

Each course has a specified number of credits. The credit structure is indicated as L-T-P-C where L stands for lecture hours per week, T for tutorial hours per week, P for practical hours per week, and C for total credits.

4.1.3 Course Categories

Courses are categorized as:
- Core Courses: Compulsory courses required for a programme
- Elective Courses: Courses that students can choose from a specified list
- Open Elective Courses: Courses from other departments that students can choose
- Audit Courses: Courses that students can attend without earning credits

4.1.4 Course Registration

Every student must register for courses at the beginning of each semester as per the schedule announced in the Academic Calendar. Registration is complete only after the student has enrolled in the required number of courses and the same has been approved by the Faculty Advisor.

4.1.5 Add/Drop Period

Students may add or drop courses within the first two weeks of the semester as specified in the Academic Calendar. After the add/drop period, students can withdraw from courses with a W grade until the date specified in the Academic Calendar.

4.1.6 Conduct of Courses

Each course is conducted by the Instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors, as needed. The Instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per Subsection 5.2.

The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the Instructor(s) concerned. The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.

A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face to face physical interaction with the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students to be concurrently connected to the classroom interaction via electronic conferencing involving both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up the study of an approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the Senate, under the supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation component applicable to courses being run through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical supervision of a faculty. All laboratory component of a course requiring the use of the specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact.

4.1.7 Teaching Assignments

The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in consultation with the Head of that Department.

4.2 Evaluation

4.2.1 Components of Evaluation

The evaluation of a student's performance in a course shall be based on continuous assessment throughout the semester. The evaluation components may include quizzes, assignments, projects, mid-semester examination, end-semester examination, laboratory work, and any other component as specified by the instructor.

4.2.2 Mid-Semester Examination

Mid-semester examination will be conducted as per the schedule specified in the Academic Calendar. The duration of the examination shall normally be two hours.

4.2.3 End-Semester Examination

End-semester examination will be conducted as per the schedule specified in the Academic Calendar. The duration of the examination shall normally be three hours.

4.2.4 Make-up Examination

A student who misses an examination due to valid reasons may be permitted to appear for a make-up examination. The request for make-up examination must be submitted to the Head of the Department with supporting documents within three days of the missed examination.

5. GRADING SYSTEM

5.1 Letter Grades

The performance of a student in each course is evaluated on a ten-point scale using letter grades. The letter grades and their corresponding grade points are as follows:

A* (Exceptional): 10
A (Outstanding): 10
A- (Excellent): 9
B (Very Good): 8
B- (Good): 7
C (Average): 6
C- (Below Average): 5
D (Marginal): 4
E (Poor): 2
F (Fail): 0
I (Incomplete): No grade point
S (Satisfactory completion of course): No grade point
X (Unsatisfactory completion of course): No grade point
W (Withdrawal from course): No grade point

5.2 Award of Grades

The instructor shall recommend the grades for all students registered in the course. The grades shall be submitted to the Head of the Department within the date specified in the Academic Calendar. The grades shall be reviewed and approved by the Departmental Undergraduate or Postgraduate Committee as applicable.

The process of awarding grades involves:
1. Evaluation of all components of assessment
2. Computation of total marks
3. Award of letter grades based on relative grading
4. Submission of grades by the Instructor
5. Scrutiny of grades by the Department
6. Recommendation of grades by the Head of the Department after scrutiny of grades by a moderation committee
7. Display of grades by Instructors
8. Grade correction, if any, within 48 hours of display of grades after approval of the head of the department
9. Approval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG)
10. Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG)
11. Approval of results by the Chairman Senate
12. Results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptional cases, the student may appeal to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal justification.

5.3 Grade Point Averages

5.3.1 Semester Grade Point Average

The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a student in all the courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the respective semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student in N courses registered during a semester are G1, G2, GN, and the corresponding credits C1, C2, CN, then the SGPA is given by the following formula:

SGPA = (G1*C1 + G2*C2 + ... + GN*CN) / (C1 + C2 + ... + CN)

The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester.

5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average

The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. The CGPA is computed similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is calculated on the basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and courses in which S/X grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters.

The SGPA and CGPA calculation are based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone.

6. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT

A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at the end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.

7. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES

The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.

REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

8. UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Undergraduate programmes:
- Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.)
- Bachelor of Technology - Master of Technology Dual Degree (B.Tech.-M.Tech.)

9. UNDERGRADUATE ADMISSIONS

9.1 Admission Procedure

Admission to the B.Tech. Programmes is made through the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) conducted at all India level. The details of the admission procedure are notified by the Joint Admission Board.

9.2 Eligibility for Admission

A candidate must have passed the final examination of the 10+2 system or its equivalent with Physics, Chemistry, and Mathematics as subjects. The candidate must also satisfy the minimum qualifying criteria as specified by the Joint Admission Board.

9.3 Reservation Policy

The reservation policy of the Government of India will be followed for admission to all programmes.

10.4 Visiting Students

A visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in India or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities.

A person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the Dean (Academics). A visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. A visiting student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, Program, and nationality. Students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to regular students of the Institute.

10.5 Cancellation of Admission

Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any Program shall submit copies of their mark sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The Senate reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s). Also, the Senate reserves the right to cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission.

10.6 Fulfillment of Admission Requirements

Admission to any undergraduate Program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. The Senate should formally approve all admissions to the Undergraduate Programmes.

11. UG REGISTRATION

11.1 Limits on Registration

A student must register for a minimum of 15 credits and a maximum of 26 credits in a regular semester. In the summer term, a student can register for a maximum of 12 credits.

11.2 Minimum Credits for Degree

The minimum credits required for the award of different degrees are as follows:

B.Tech. (including minor/department/interdisciplinary area specialization): 6 years maximum duration
B.Tech. - M.Tech.: 8 years maximum duration

11.3 Course Requirements

The course requirements for each programme are specified in the curriculum document approved by the Senate. The curriculum consists of core courses, elective courses, and other requirements.

12. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS

12.1 Minimum Grade Requirement

A student must earn a minimum grade of D in each registered course to pass the course. If a student fails in a course, he/she must repeat the course or take an equivalent course as approved by the Department.

12.2 Minimum CGPA Requirement

A student must maintain a minimum CGPA of 5.0 to continue in the programme. If the CGPA falls below 5.0, the student may be placed on academic probation or asked to discontinue the programme.

13. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS

13.1 Minimum Attendance

A student must have a minimum attendance of 80% in each course to be eligible to appear for the end-semester examination. Students with attendance below 80% may be debarred from appearing in the end-semester examination.

14. ACADEMIC STANDARDS

14.1 Academic Probation

A student whose CGPA falls below 5.0 at the end of a semester will be placed on academic probation. The student must improve the CGPA to at least 5.0 by the end of the next semester to continue in the programme.

14.2 Discontinuation

A student who fails to meet the minimum academic requirements may be asked to discontinue the programme. The decision will be made by the Academic Committee based on the recommendation of the Department.

15. LEAVE RULES

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DUGC, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the DUGC.

15.1 Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation

Undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid-semester recess and vacation as specified in the Academic Calendar.

15.2 Short Leave

A student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of 10 days on medical grounds, and for 5 days for any other valid reason.

15.3 Semester Withdrawal

It may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. DUGC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student.

15.4 Academic Leave

To help students broaden their horizons and gain course/work experience, she/he may be permitted to proceed to other academic institutes/ Industry/ R&D organization in India or abroad. Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as:
(a) Fieldwork
(b) Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
(c) Entrepreneurship initiative
(d) Engineering innovation
(e) Exchange program as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in India or abroad
(f) Internship work

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by DUGC before the leave is granted. A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two semesters on academic leave. A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 20 credits per semester as certified by the DUGC and approved by the Course Equivalence Committee.

16. BRANCH CHANGE

(a) An undergraduate student is eligible to apply for branch change at the end of the second semester only, provided the student satisfies the following criteria:
1. Secured a CGPA, at the end of the second semester, of:
i. Greater than or equal to 7.0 for SC/ST and PD applicants
ii. Greater than or equal to 8.0 for other applicants
2. Completed all prescribed course credits for the first two semesters (including the non-graded courses).
3. No backlog at the end of the second semester.

(b) The student should have no disciplinary action against him/her.

(c) Change of the branch will be permitted strictly in the order of merit as determined by the CGPA at the end of the second semester.

17. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATION

17.1 Duration Requirements

The student must complete the programme within the maximum duration specified for the programme. The maximum duration includes any period of withdrawal or leave.

17.2 Academic

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum credits as per Table 11.2 in Section 11.3 for all degrees.

17.3 Payment of Fees and Dues

The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).

17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.

17.5 Completion of engagement in NCC, NSS or NSO

The student should have completed extra-curricular activity like performing arts, sports, National Cadet Corps, National Service Schemes, and National Sports Organisation for a period of at least two semesters during their B.Tech. Program.

17.6 Award of Degrees

17.6.1 Provisional Certificate

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can be provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.

17.6.2 Degree Certificate

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval. The certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.

18. AMENDMENTS

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend without notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules pertaining to its B.Tech. Programs.

REGULATIONS FOR POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

19. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate programmes:
- Master of Science (M.Sc.)
- Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.
- Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
- Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.
- Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)

20. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS

The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, the department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis and admit students as per the existing procedure.

20.1 Categories of Admission

A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories:
i. Full-time regular
ii. Full-time sponsored
iii. Part-time
iv. External
v. Executive

However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time program).

i) Full-time Regular

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.

ii) Full-time Sponsored

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.

iii) Part-time

A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attend regular classes as per the schedule of the Institute. The student must be employed in the neighbourhood of IIT Jodhpur. The student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student.

iv) External

A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped with the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.

v) Executive (only for M. Tech.)

A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in:
- An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR
- Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of 6 years.
- The part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact mode and limited direct interaction

20.2 Eligibility for Admission

The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.

The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the Senate from time to time.

Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of Governors.

20.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)

The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the following two avenues.
- The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by IITs.
- The applicants having a bachelor's degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

20.2.2 Admission to M Sc - M Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)

The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the following two avenues:
- The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by IITs.
- The applicants having a bachelor's degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

20.2.3 Admission to M Tech Program (Regular)

- The applicant must have bachelor's degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a master's degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Sciences or in a related field
- A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
- The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)

- The applicant must have bachelor's degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or a master's degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and Veterinary Science or in a related field.
- A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
- The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.
- The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)

- The applicant must have bachelor's degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or a master's degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and Veterinary Science or in a related field
- A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
- The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)

- Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any organization in India or abroad.
- The applicant must have a master's degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
- The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor's degree,
- The applicant must have a bachelor's degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).

20.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme (QIP), Defence Personnel

The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval of Chairman, Senate.

20.2.9 Admission to Ph.D (sponsored/external/part-time)

- Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in India or abroad.
- The applicant must have a master's degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
- The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor's degree,
- The applicant must have a bachelor's degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).
- The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the program.
- The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students

A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities.

Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 20.2. The application must be routed through the office of Dean R&D.

Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.

20.4 Reservation Policy

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.

21. PG REGISTRATION

21.1 Limits on Registration

Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:

M.Sc.: An M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10 credits in a semester.

M.Tech.: An M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 21.1.

Table 21.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular semester/Summer Term

M.Tech. student registered under different categories:
- Executive (Accelerated): Maximum 24, Minimum 10 credits (Regular Semester); Maximum 16, Minimum 0 credits (Summer Term)
- Executive (Normal): Maximum 17, Minimum 10 credits (Regular Semester); Maximum 9, Minimum 0 credits (Summer Term)
- Executive (Slow-Paced): Maximum 12, Minimum 3 credits (Regular Semester); Maximum 6, Minimum 0 credits (Summer Term)
- Executive (Part Time): Maximum 12, Minimum 3 credits (Regular Semester); Maximum 6, Minimum 0 credits (Summer Term)
- Full-time (Regular/Sponsored): Maximum 17, Minimum 10 credits (Regular Semester); Maximum 9, Minimum 5 credits (Summer Term)
- External: Maximum 20, Minimum 10 credits (Regular Semester); Maximum 9, Minimum 0 credits (Summer Term)
- Part-time: Maximum 12, Minimum 3 credits (Regular Semester); Maximum 6, Minimum 0 credits (Summer Term)

M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and minimum credits that an M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree student can register are equivalent to that of an M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.

Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 21.2.

Table 21.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student (Regular) can register for during the Regular semester

Ph.D. student registered under different categories:
- Full-time Regular: Maximum 16, Minimum 6 credits
- Full-time Sponsored: Maximum 16, Minimum 6 credits
- Part-time: Maximum 12, Minimum 3 credits
- External: Maximum 12, Minimum 3 credits

22.3 Minimum Credits for M.Sc. Degree

The minimum credits required for the award of M.Sc. degree is 64 credits.

22.4 Minimum Credits for M.Tech. Degree

The minimum credits required for the award of M.Tech. degree is 64 credits.

22.5 Minimum Credits for M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree

The minimum credits required for the award of M.Sc.-M.Tech. dual degree is 108 credits.

22.6 Minimum Credits for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree

The minimum credits required for the award of M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree is 80 credits for the M.Tech. part and additional research credits for the Ph.D. part.

22.7 Minimum Credits for Ph.D. Degree

The minimum credits required for the award of Ph.D. degree include coursework credits and research credits as specified by the Department.

22.09 Minimum CGPA Requirements

A student must maintain a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for M.Sc., M.Tech., and dual degree programmes, and a minimum CGPA of 7.0 for Ph.D. programme to continue in the programme.

23. LEAVE RULES

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the DRC.

23.1 Leave

A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid semester break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter term or mid-semester break.

A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch
An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch

The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC without assistantship during that period.

23.2 Other Leaves

Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MHRD. It will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme. Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MHRD.

23.3 Semester Withdrawal

May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student.

23.4 Academic Leave

Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as:
- Fieldwork
- Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library
- Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
- Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium
- Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision
- Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as indicated in his research proposal

24. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as follows:

24.1 M.Sc. Program

Financial assistance is available for M.Sc. students as per MHRD norms.

24.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program

A student having completed minimum credit requirements of an M.Sc. program at the end of the second year with:
(a) CGPA greater than or equal to 8
OR
(b) have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.

24.3 M.Tech. Program

A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.

24.4 Executive M Tech Program

Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the Institute.

24.5 M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree Program

Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with regular Ph.D. students.

24.6 Ph.D. Program

A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the norms of IIT Jodhpur.

(a) A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms/or equivalent applicable for non-science departments.

(b) The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech or equivalent post-bachelor's degree

(c) A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.

A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided the student has met qualifier requirement. The enhanced fellowship will commence from the date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the qualifier requirement. The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student shall stop from the day of submission of the Thesis.

27. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATION

27.1 Duration Requirements

The maximum duration for completion of different postgraduate programmes from the date of registration is as follows:

M.Sc. All qualifying degrees: 4 years
M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree All qualifying degrees: 7 years

M.Tech. Programs:
Full-time Regular/Sponsored All qualifying degrees: 3 years
Part-time All qualifying degrees: 0 years
Executive All qualifying degrees: 1 year

Ph.D. Programs:
Full-time Regular:
Engineering discipline:
M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline: 2 years
M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline: 5 years
B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline: 5 years

Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline:
M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline: 2 years

Part-time All qualifying degrees: 0 years
External All qualifying degrees: 1 year

27.2 Academic

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum credits as per Section 22.3 for M. Sc., Section 22.4 for M. Tech., Section 22.5 for M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 22.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 22.7 for Ph.D., while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 22.09.

27.3 No Dues Clearance

Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by Dean (Academics)

27.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.

27.5 Award of Degrees

27.5.1 Provisional Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, can be provided with a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate.

27.5.2 Degree Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, is recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval.

28. AMENDMENTS

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes at IIT-Jodhpur.
